---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Resilience of Plants
image: assets/img/plantOne.jpg
---

Resilience is a term that has been borrowed from physics. Words associated with resilience such as stress, trauma, and depression also have their counterparts in the physical sciences. They were borrowed to help explain unobservable mental health conditions. For the most part, how experiences alter our minds cannot be observed. Some understanding of resilience is made by comparing these characteristics in the physical sciences. This is why resilience is a word that can be found in engineering, psychology, and even politics. How would we distinguish when these words are used comparatively to help understand something unobservable? How do we know that we’re actually making wrong comparisons without knowing that we’re making them? Perhaps, when making comparisons, are we comparing human traits to things like metal, aluminum, or stone, whose resilience are unlike our own?

I like to find examples in nature that exhibits resilience because they are natural and observable. By natural and observable, I mean that it doesn't require intrusive tools to see what's happening. In looking at resilience, it’s important also to see the cause of change, which is a stressor. I ask myself, what happened that caused the change to take place? Because of this, resilience is interesting to talk about, but also difficult. It’s interesting because resilience is associated with all sorts of virtue, but also difficult because what went wrong has rarely been a pleasant topic of everyday conversation. It can be personal or reveal something we don’t like. So I resort to plants. 

The picture of the plant above suffered a harsh chemical treatment for several days. This would be enough to wilt anything living. By appearance, it could have been dead. It took several weeks for it to recover as seen in the picture. The chemical caused it to wilt, so that’s the stressor. Resilience then is its capability to recover from a stressor. There are as many examples of resilience as there are stressors. If I pull the root of the plant and throw it on the street to dry, the stressors would include me pulling at the root and the heat from the sun. So resilience is what's keeping the plant from perishing uprooted under the heat. This can be measured by how long it took to recover or not, by how much, how it withstood the stressor, and the conditions that helped it recover or last for some time. The roots, perhaps, were unaffected by the chemicals, so only the leaves died, and because the root survived, it’s able to regrow new leaves. This is what is interesting about resilience, it’s like resurrection. It also tells us what keeps things going. In this case, it was the root. 

I like to think of human resilience in this way. As long as there is some capacity for life, it’s only a matter of time that life will thrive. Thriving can be seen as resilience building. This is different from how resilience is thought of as a material substance like metal, which can be depressed by an impact. But metal is meant to do that. If not, then we wouldn't have all sort of things, like doorknobs. When talking about resilience, it’s easy to make a comparison about something that human’s are not meant to do. People do not always “bounce back” because we’re not exactly like rubber. It’s important to consider the stressor. If it is something that lasts indefinitely, where people don’t have any autonomy over, the notion of “bouncing back,” though admirable, is not very helpful. Another comparison that we make about resilience is how people are damaged. So if, for some magical reason, the aforementioned plant turned into a person, brown leaves and everything, would I be inclined to award the plant-person with the distinction of resilience? It seems, more likely, according to our articles on resilience, that our plant-person suffers from some degenerative damage. How can the plant-person perform perfectly when it is recovering from chemical damage? It is far better to have something that did not suffer from any damage. We want perfection, but ignore the stressor. Perhaps we can't have both resilience and perfection? So we have come to a contradiction about the virtue we admire. How is it possible to admire resilience but prefer something undamaged? How is it possible to celebrate resilience, but also not talk about what made the plant resilient? I don't think that even I can survive such a chemical treatment. Resilience, and words associated with it, comes with a lot of carry over from the physical sciences, and for me, at least, it’s helpful to distinguish a natural expectation in comparison to a wishful one. 
