---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Thoughts on privacy, security, and transparency 
---

Privacy, security, and transparency are some of the reasons why people move onto a personal website. For these reasons, I chose to host my own webspace for writing. Many social media platforms underperform in these qualities. In regards to these qualities, I’ve heard some favorable things about Jekyll, a static site generator, which runs on a personal server. These are some of the things I considered in publishing my writings on my personal server using Jekyll. 

I. Privacy  

Making my own blog was not easy. It meant having to forego the convenience of writing in social media platforms. However, having a personal webspace provides more privacy for your personal data. Privacy on the internet means that you do not need to give your consent over your data to use a particular technology. Social media websites, for instance, use personal data to improve user engagement by adjusting their algorithms to their users' behaviors. Your personal data, therefore, is stored on their server, where they perform data analytics to measure user engagement to improve the likelihood that their users will buy something off the internet. Personal webspace can also use data analytics but with limitations because, for the most part, they’re not trying to sell stuff. I don’t have one on my webspace, but when I do, I’ll get one that protects my readers data and privacy. Data analytics is basically a method of making inferences about data. For instance, if they determine my ethnicity based on my last name and the people I follow, that’s considered data analytics. This could completely be erroneous, but because of the application of a technical method, and some impressive spreadsheet, the data produced by analytics become more important than the words of the user. 

II. Security 

I am part of a generation that was hesitant to jump into the social media hype. A social media platform had to pay me to use their platform. And even when they paid me, my experience of it was so bad, I thought I was going to puke. I had many moments like this on social media. On the first month I used that platform, my keyboard malfunctioned. I suspected that it was hacked, but even though social media websites are hot beds for malware, viruses, and scams, I try to give them the benefit of the doubt. Security pertains more to the vulnerability of your devices and information on the net. Although I cannot ascertain that having a personal website will prevent every vulnerability, at least my information is not in the same server as countless others. So if one person’s security is compromised, all others’ can be compromised as well. 

III. Transparency 

When you host your personal web-site on your own server, your data is yours. You actually get to move around your data and do whatever it is that you want with them. Unless you give someone else permission, which most social media platforms require of their users, your data cannot be manipulated nor can a third party make decisions about you based on their interpretation. Unless you’re covered by the GDPR or the CCPA, your data is inaccessible to you. I learned most of the information to write this piece by obtaining my data from social media platforms. When you host your own website under your own server, you're producing your own data. When I write an article in some online platform, it’s broken apart into data to be used to increase user engagement and to increase the likelihood of people buying stuff. How the data is used to attract more users is entirely up to those whom the user has given consent. For me, it comes down to the integrity of my writings. I don’t want my writings to create miscommunications through conflicting interests.

These three are strong enough reasons for me to forego the convenience of social media platforms. The disadvatage is that I don't have a nice like button, a premade image, or an algorithm to curate my pieces. However, since I have just created my website, I have actually yet to determine if these qualities will be maintained. I hope that if these thoughts do not save me from those, it may someone else. I also hope that in considering my thoughts about these qualities, my reader have seen that there are several layers of discourse when writing on social media platforms. The layers of discourse consist of how the reader experience the text, the application of data analysis, and conflicting interests, all of which are noise that detract from the meaning of the writer's words. While I am not sure if the qualities of privacy, security, and transparency will be maintained for long, I can be sure that my website will be free of ads and random people giving advice. 

