---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Character Study of Michael From The Movie "The Boys In The Band"
image: assets/img/flower002.jpeg
headline: Running from Difficulties and Parallels to Stone Wall
---

Michael from the movie, “The Boys in the Band,” is a revealing comparison to Ari, from “Head On.” A comparison with Ari shows that motivation is not always chosen. It is easy to think of motivation as under the direction of freewill. Michael is driven by running from both the hatred against same sex lovers during 1968 and also by the self-hate that such a society breeds within the characters of the movie. He is running both from society and from himself. Michael sees people from the perspective that aspects of same sex love is repressed one way or the other and this leads him to be severe amongst his friends and leads him to make a mistake in falsely accusing a straight man as gay, which reveals more about his perception of sexuality. This was the motive of the game he pressures everyone to play. He wants everyone to realize that hatred will prevent them from completing the game. While one of them manage to complete the game, it is only at the expense of knowing that his partner did not love him in return. Michael is caught in a difficult balancing act. He has yet to resolve his religious and sexual identity, which creates more inner conflict. This is significant because Michael is a gay man who has rebuilt his family and his life in accordance with his sexual identity. His apartment has more erotic art of men than he does of crucifixes. If he decides that religion is not for him, he will not lose his friends or any social support. His environment will only be slightly changed. So the tension of the conflict between sexuality and religion for Michael is intrinsic. 

Michael is confronted with a difficult question that many men like him face. How do they confront hatred? His first attempt is to preserve the social circle of his gay friends. When a straight friend, whose unaware of his and his friends’ sexual preference, joins the party, he fails to preserve the social circle and a fight breaks loose between his straight and gay friend. He then again tries to confront hatred by placing everyone in a game where they have to call a person whom they have secretly loved. Again, his attempt fails. Some of his friends leave the party regretful and he ends up falsely accusing a straight man as gay. His attempts backfire and he learns that he himself has yet to confront his own demons from which, at the end of the film, he runs. When a friend tells him that he cannot play the game since he has yet to love anyone, his mental defenses seem to override the statement. This is important because, if sexuality is defined by what is loved, then a person who has yet to love anyone does not really possess a sexual identity. He may have a sexuality, but a sexual identity is created. Love can be said to result from pleasure and need. Pleasure is easy to resolve. Necessity, however, to need someone, is harder to come across. This is why love is rare among straight and gay folks alike because all parties must both take pleasure and need from each other.

The setting, 1968 New York, is important because it was the year before the Stone Wall rebellion. The setting suggests that Michael and his circle is part of the tipping point that led to the Stone Wall rebellion and the consequent protests that it inspired. The parallels between Stone Wall and Michael’s party suggest that oppression leads to a breaking point. The similarity between Stone Wall and Michael’s party is the friction between the increasing criminalization of gay men and their constant attempts of building a life, which is deprived, if not ruined, by attempts at criminalization. When the straight guest becomes unbridled when he realizes that he is in a gay party, the viewer recognizes how gay life is deprived both by violence and criminalization. After the assault, the party then goes down hill, although at a steady pace due to the neutralizing presence of the celebrant. 

Michael is hosting and organizing a birthday party for his gay friend with other gay men. This may seem common place to modern day viewers, but in 1968, this is a countercultural event. It makes a statement of denial against the attempts to deprive gay life, but because of the increased criminalization of same sex desire in that period, it is also subject to being broken apart.

From the beginning, Michael’s plan has been amiss. One of his guests arrives too early and an unexpected friend drops-by with misleading warnings. Today, this may seem like trivial disturbances, but again this is pre-Stone Wall, not only were gays less visible, they were also criminalized at various levels of institutions. This makes their attempt to build life vulnerable. As the movie progresses, the continued unexpected disturbances push Michael to break his abstinence from alcohol, have a nervous break down, and causes him to run away from the difficulties of pervasive hatred. This change in Michael is cyclical. The viewer can assume that after the night is over, he will again return to lavishness and waste. Michael is a character that is reflective of the period from which he was made. His character and the obstacles for queer folks of pre-Stone Wall remain relevant today. 