---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Character Study of Chiron From The Movie "Moonlight"
image: assets/img/moon001.jpeg
headline: Three Cycles of Tragedy
---

The story takes place in three stages of a person’s life. These stages are childhood, young manhood, and adulthood. This form recalls past attempts to capture the phases of life such as in Shakespeare’s “Seven Ages of Man.” It provides a notion of how to live in a correct way, which is part of its appeal. The narrative form also captures the tragedy that comes from things that cannot be controlled such as time. The notion of different stages is important because it forecasts a pattern. The movie could have structured the three stages more completely by ending in late adulthood. Perhaps, it ended where it did to show that the cycle has yet again completed itself. It captures the tragedy of an individual who becomes a drug dealer due to matters he cannot control. This cycle is seen in the character’s father figure, who displays a virtuous character, but whose lot in society has led him to be a drug dealer. 

It can be said that difficulty motivates the majority of characters in the movie. The mother does drugs to escape poverty and to cope with the fear for her son’s fate, while the protagonist finds a mother figure in a stranger to gain solace. This is similar to the movie, “The Boys in the Band,” where difficulty moves the actions of the characters. In “Moonlight,” The protagonist, Chiron, is motivated by the realization of his identity from childhood onto adulthood. Difficulties, related to his same sex romantic preference, lead him to repeating a tragic cycle. If the film were to continue into late adulthood, one can only expect that Chiron would die by violence as did his father figure before him. 

In childhood, bullying and the challenges of living with a mother who is not only a drug addict, but has difficulties accepting the effeminate characteristics of her son, lead the protagonist to form a familial relationship with strangers who would become his paternal and maternal figure. This chosen family discusses with the protagonist about being gay. He becomes estranged from his biological mother and from friends once he begins to realize that he is marked by difference. 

The protagonist continues to be motivated by realizing his same sex romantic preference as a young man. The difficulties he had in childhood continues as well. He is still the object of bullying, even more so since his effeminate mannerism has become more salient, and his mother has become even more reliant on drugs. His attempt to form a close relationship ends in violence, which gets him arrested and consequently shatters any attempts at realization. It is evident, from this stage, that his attempts to form a romantic relationship with the same gender is met with suspicion and hostility. This cycle continues onto different stages of his life. The cycle seems to have continued from his childhood. His mother observes that it was the reason he was always being the object of bullying. It is in adulthood where the character’s motivation changes. He is no longer the same slight, quiet, and effeminate young man, but becomes more alike his paternal figure.  

In Chiron’s adulthood, we realize that he shares the same fate as his paternal figure despite their differences. In childhood and young adulthood, the protagonist was someone unlikely to be drawn to the career of a drug dealer. Yet, despite his and his paternal figure’s characteristics and virtues, he plays the ironic role of the virtuous drug dealer. While the paternal figure is a drug dealer by profession, he seems motivated by caring for his family and for his community. Chiron picks up these traits, becoming the benevolent and virtuous drug dealer to those who shares the same fate. It is at this stage where he leaves behind any thought of realizing his same sex romantic preference. Memories of the past still remain with him. The idealization of the first impression of love is caused by the thwarted realization of his attempt to form a close relationship. This is actually a common narrative in gay stories, where the protagonist is driven to relive the experience of first love. The tragedy, in most of these narratives, is that everything has changed, and to be driven by the desire to recreate the past is an experience with the absurd.  

Chiron is a complex character since the narrative encompasses three stages of life. It’s difficult to assign one main motivation for the character. Although, the realization of his identity, both sexual and ethnic, seems to be constant in all three stages. 


