---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Structure of Thoughts
image: assets/img/rockMossIMG.jpeg
---

I wrote an article about a poetic convention that lacked a regard for time. This one is about commonplace books, a manuscript for sorting and remembering information. While reading “Discourses on Livy,” I wondered about the order Machiavelli wrote his commentary. The “Discourses” consists of three books. The titles are in the form of observations, like “This is how the Romans did this and why it failed.” The book is dense and its history dates all the way back to the Republican era of Rome to the Renaissance. It’s full of interesting anecdotes that Machiavelli examines for political and strategic relevance. He draws anecdotes from his own experience, his contemporary politics, and history from ancient Greece, Rome, and even Asia. This would consists of an extensive collection of references. I was faced with my own way of making sense of the book and how Machiavelli made sense of Livy. 

Commonplace books were widely used during the Renaissance. They included everything from pictures to verses of poetry. The goal was to document the development of ideas. Ideas were seen as a result of the relationship between understanding and information. It was a source of ideas for poets, philosophers, and scientists. Some notable authors of commonplace books include John Locke, Ronald Reagan, and Guillermo del Toro, although del Toro doesn’t call his notes as such, I’ve included it in my study because of its disregard for order. Today, with screens and the internet, presenting information is an issue. Everything recedes to the past. This is because most interfaces from search engines to social media have based their model on a slot machine. The novelty of things wears out faster due to this way of presenting information. The commonplace book, presumably, keeps information relevant because they reflect the continual development of ideas. It’s a personal book of inspiration. However, how information is presented on paper vs. on the screen are different beasts altogether. I started my commonplace book about a decade ago. It consists mostly of the poetry I enjoyed. I still remember some of the verses that I wrote then. I simply wrote down any poem that I enjoyed into a notebook, so I could read them all in one place. It was a hassle switching books around. The problem with me is that I am interested in too many things. I need a way to keep track of all the things I’ve found interesting over the years. I did not have a system for indexing. The challenge is how to have a reference that is convenient to sort through and does not become too wieldy with information. 

John Locke made his system when he needed to reference information to compete with Blaise Pascal. Locke’s system for indexing has been used for decades. His index is composed of two list. The first lists all the Roman alphabets. Each letter has a corresponding list of vowels. His entry would be sorted based on the first consonant and first vowel. So if his entry is under the heading 'vintage,' he would write the page number for that entry on V-i. The advantage of this system is that the index is only two pages, a spread. The second list of vowels makes it easier to sort through rather than having a list of alphabets. 

Locke’s index is suited for notebooks. Commonplace books can also be written on index cards. I discovered Ronald Reagan’s index cards at the Ronald Reagan  Presidential Library. It’s just a collection of random quotes he liked. He would use the quotes on the cards in his speeches. He took these cards around with him. The advantage of using cards is that they're portable and flexible to organize. I can stack them in whatever order I wish. The disadvantage is that they can quickly amass into a mess if their order is not well maintained. I often mixed up my cards and found them unpleasant to read through. They also remind me too much of school. 

The structure of commonplace books can give way to creativity. Del Toro’s notebooks are artworks themselves. Asides from being an exceptionally talented director, he can also draw. They remind me of illuminated manuscripts from Medieval Period. His notebooks doesn’t have a structured order. At least, that’s what I gather for his distaste of structure. His notebooks are easy to sort through despite not having a system. It is easy to sort through because it is driven by images. Looking through his notebook of ideas for monsters, characters, and settings for his movies is like reading a comic book. The choice of leather bound notebooks is also appealing. The only thing is that unless you’re good at drawing and are visual, this way can be fairly difficult. However, it is perhaps one that lends itself best to creative pursuits. 

A commonplace book is not a journal. You won’t find Reagan’s daily complaint in his cards of quotes. Its purpose is to produce ideas for one’s vocation. Reagan’s quotes helped him make speeches, del Toro helped him make ideas for his movies, and Locke helped him rival Pascal, who remembered everything. In revamping my commonplace book, I may make a combination of Locke and del Toro’s method. This way, I can have a larger picture with an index and lend better significance to my notes by giving them pictures. Each of these examples have tailored their design to their purposes. Perhaps the best way to begin is to find that purpose. 


	