---
layout: post
author: Harold
title: Nature in the Indigenous Poetry of the Hanunoo-Mangyans 
---

Much of poetry comes from either memory of the past. A lot of poetry becomes relics of history. The rhymes of Shakespearan sonnets, or the measured rythm of blank verse, helped actors in reciting their lines. The repetition of a villanelle, sestina, or a pantoum, aids recollection. Not only do the forms serve the preservation of the past, but also the content are historical or beloging to past experience. The reader has to look elsewhere to find a poetic convention that is not another augment to history, which some has mistaken for fantasy. I found such a convention in the poetry of the Hanunoo-Mangyan, who used nature as a form of expression and used poetic conventions to understand nature. 

Nature in the Ambahan, the poetic convention of the Hanunoo-Mangyans, consists of wilderness both tamed and untamed. It has, not only objects found in nature such as trees, flowers, or animals, but also how these act in their environment. The growth of vines along a tree can be a fitting expression for a poet's desire. While wild aninals suit the expression of an impending threat. Rivers that divide the land can express the longing of being divided from a friend. This is nature as it is observed and not conceived. 

The expression is not burdend by an attempt to preserve past experience because they are associated with a close observation of nature. The Hanunoo-Mangyans were noted experts in vegetation. They gave the name to the life-forms in their environment, which found its way in everyday conversation and poetic expression. The simplicity of their poetic form attests to this lack of need to preserve the past through artifice. Nature is part of their language. I found this notion, in my own artificial means, useful in writing a sestina without historical burden. A lot of sestinas are historical. Ezra Pound's "Altaforte" is about Bertran de Born, "Sestina" by Sir Edmund Gosse is on Arnaut Daniel, and Swineburne's "Sestina" is about recollections of his soul. While Swineburn does use nature in his poetry, it is a Romanticized form of nature with individualized human traits. All the birds are singing songs, the leaves are soft and dewy, and everything has wings. Romantic poets did write about nture to individualize themselves. Their version of nature is distinguished by individual traits rather than natural occurances and human nature. Poets from the Golden Age of Rome, who politicized love, are to blame for this. Nothing is wrong with poetry being an artifice for history. Only time recedes, and the more time recedes, the more these conventions belong to the past. 

Ambahans are inaccessible. They were written in a script dating back to an Indian script more than 2,500 years ago. The writing system has given way to the post-Spanish era. Christian missionaries attempted to replace their language with a post-colonial form of Tagalog. Commerce forced them to use a foreign language. Dead languages are not like Latin and Ancient Greek, but languages that do not survive with time due to political and economic attempts to seize their usage. A unique attribute of the Ambahan is that it was a poetic form that involved a community. This is comparable to troubadour poetry, where an entire community of poets were involved in its innovation. This differs from an artistic movement, which is motivated by ideas about art. Consequently, poets today have become relics of the past. They are conceived as solitary figures, no doubt bookish, and doomed to be lost in thought. The disadvantage of the individual poet is evident. He lacks the combined innovation of an entire community. This is why no one today can write a good sonnet, sestina, or anything in the past when innovation has reached its thresholds in these poetic forms and where innovation was a group effort. Much more unfortunate is that attempt to write a form from a lost culture and even more so if you belong to that culture.  